@document.meta
title: Modern Man in Search of a Soul
description: 
authors: Carl Jung
categories: philosophy
created: 2022-08-27
version: 0.0.11
@end

* Dream Analysis in its practical application
  The use of dream-analysis in psychotherapy is still a muchdebated question.
  Many practitioners find it indispensable in the treatment of neuroses, and
  ascribe as much importance to the psychic activity manifested in dreams as to
  consciousness itself. Others, on the contrary, dispute the value of
  dream-analysis, and regard dreams as a negligible by-product of the psyche.

  Obviously, if a person holds the view that the unconscious plays a leading
  role in the formation of neuroses, he will attribute practical significance
  to dreams as direct expressions of the unconscious. If, on the other hand, he
  denies the unconscious or thinks that it has no part in the development of
  neuroses, he will minimize the importance of dream-analysis. It is
  regrettable that in this year of grace 1931, more than half a century since
  Carus formulated the concept of the unconscious, over a century since Kant
  spoke of the “immeasurable … field of obscure ideas”, and nearly two hundred
  years since Leibniz postulated an unconscious psychic activity, not to
  mention the achievements Copied selected text to selection primary: of Janet,
  Flournoy and Freud—that after all this, the actuality of the unconscious
  should still be a matter for  controversy. Since it is my intention to deal
  exclusively with questions of practical treatment, I will not attempt in this
  place a defence of the hypothesis of the unconscious, though it is obvious
  enough that dream-analysis stands or falls  with this hypothesis. Without it
  the dream appears to be merely a freak of nature, a meaningless conglomerate
  of  memory-fragments left over from the happenings of the day. Were the dream
  nothing more than this, there would be  no excuse for the present discussion.
  We must recognize the unconscious if we are to treat of dream-analysis at
  all, for  we do not resort to it as a mere exercise of the wits, but as a
  method for uncovering hitherto unconscious psychic  contents which are
  causally related to the neurosis and therefore of importance in its
  treatment. Anyone who deems  this hypothesis unacceptable must simply rule
  out the question of the practicability of dream-analysis.  

  But since, according to our hypothesis, the unconscious plays a causal part
  in the neurosis, and since dreams are the  direct expression of unconscious
  psychic activity, the attempt to analyse and interpret dreams is entirely
  justified from  a scientific standpoint. Quite apart from therapeutic
  results, we may expect this line of endeavour to give us scientific  insight
  into psychic causality. For the practitioner, however, scientific discoveries
  can at most be a gratifying by-product of his efforts in the field of
  therapy. He will not feel called upon to apply dream-analysis to his patients
  on the  chance that it may throw light upon the problem of psychic causality.
  He may believe, of course, that the insight so  gained is of therapeutic
  value—in which case he will regard dream-analysis as one of his professional
  duties. It is well  known that the Freudian school is of the opinion that
  important therapeutic effects are achieved by throwing light  upon the
  unconscious causal factors—that is, by explaining them to the patient and
  thus making him conscious of the sources of his trouble. 

  If we assume, for the time being, that this expectation is borne out by the
  facts, we can restrict ourselves to the questions whether or not
  dream-analysis enables us to discover the unconscious causes of the neurosis,
  and whether it can do this unaided, or must be used in conjunction with other
  methods. The Freudian answer, I may assume, is common knowledge. My own
  experience confirms this view inasmuch as I have found that dreams not
  infrequently bring to light in an unmistakable way the unconscious contents
  that are causal factors in a neurosis. Most often it is the initial dreams
  that do this—I mean, those dreams that a patient reports at the very outset
  of a treatment. An illustration will perhaps be helpful. 

  I was consulted by a man who held a prominent position in the world. He was
  afflicted with a sense of anxiety and insecurity, and complained of dizziness
  sometimes resulting in nausea, of a heavy head and difficulty in
  breathing—this being an exact description of the symptoms of
  mountain-sickness. He had had an unusually successful career, and had risen,
  with the help of ambition, industry and native talent, from a humble origin
  as the son of a poor peasant. Step by step he had climbed, attaining at last
  an important post that offered him every opportunity for further social
  advancement. He had actually reached a place in life from which he could have
  begun his ascent into the upper regions, when suddenly his neurosis
  intervened. At this point of his story the patient could not refrain from
  that stereotyped exclamation which begins with the familiar words: “And just
  now, when I …” The fact that he had all the symptoms of mountain-sickness was
  highly appropriate to the peculiar situation in which he found himself. He
  had brought with him to the consultation two dreams of the preceding night.

  The first dream was as follows: “I am once more in the small village where I
  was born. Some peasant boys who went to school with me are standing together
  in the street. I walk past them, pretending not to know them. I hear one of
  them, who is pointing at me, say: ‘He doesn’t often come back to our
  village.’” No tricks of interpretation are needed to recognize and to
  understand the allusion to the humble beginnings of the dreamer’s career. The
  dream says quite clearly: “You forget how far down you began.” 

  Here is the second dream: “I am in a great hurry because I am going on a
  journey. I hunt up my baggage, but cannot find it. Time flies, and the train
  will soon be leaving. Finally I succeed in getting all my things together. I
  hurry along the street, discover that I have forgotten a brief-case
  containing important papers, dash breathlessly back again, find it at last,
  and then run towards the station, but make hardly any headway. With a final
  effort I rush on to the platform only to find the train steaming out into the
  yards. It is very long, and runs in a curious S-shaped curve. It occurs to me
  that if the driver is not careful, and puts on full steam when he comes to
  the straight stretch, the rear coaches will still be on the curve and will be
  thrown over by the speed of the train. As a matter of fact the driver opens
  the throttle as I try to shout. The rear coaches rock frightfully, and are
  actually thrown off the rails. There is a terrible catastrophe. I awake in
  terror.” 

  Here, too, we can understand without much difficulty the situation
  represented by the dream. It pictures the patient’s frantic haste to advance
  himself still further. Since the driver at the front of the train goes
  thoughtlessly ahead, the coaches behind him rock and finally overturn—that
  is, a neurosis is developed. It is clear that, at this period of life, the
  patient had reached the highest point of his career—that the effort of the
  long ascent from his lowly origin had exhausted his strength. He should have
  contented himself with his achievements, but instead he is driven by his
  ambition to attempt to scale heights of success for which he is not fitted.
  The neurosis came upon him as a warning. Circumstances prevented my treating
  the patient, and my view of his case did not satisfy him. The upshot was that
  events ran their course in the way indicated by the dream. He tried to
  exploit the professional openings that tempted his ambition and ran so
  violently off the track that the train-wreck was realized in actual life. The
  patient’s anamnesis permitted the inference that the mountain-sickness
  pointed to his inability to climb any further. The inference is confirmed by
  his dreams which present this inability as a fact. 

  We here come upon a characteristic of dreams that must take first place in any
  discussion of the applicability of dream-analysis to the treatment of
  neuroses. The dream gives a true picture of the subjective state, while the
  conscious mind denies that this state exists, or recognizes it only
  grudgingly. The patient’s conscious ego could see no reason why he should not
  go steadily forward; he continued his struggle for advancement, refusing to
  admit the fact which subsequent events made all too plain—that he was
  actually at the end of his tether. When, in such cases, we listen to the
  dictates of the conscious mind, we are always in doubt. We can draw opposite
  conclusions from the patient’s anamnesis. After all, the private soldier may
  carry a marshal’s baton in his knapsack, and many a son of poor parents has
  achieved the highest success. Why should it not be so in my patient’s case?
  Since my judgement is fallible, why should my own conjecture be more
  dependable than his? At this point the dream comes in as the expression of an
  involuntary psychic process not controlled by the conscious outlook. It
  presents the subjective state as it really is. It has no respect for my
  conjectures or for the patient’s views as to how things should be, but simply
  tells how the matter stands. I have therefore made it a rule to put dreams on
  a plane with physiological fact. If sugar appears in the urine, then the
  urine contains sugar, and not albumen or urobilin or something else that I
  may have been led to expect. This is to say that I take dreams as facts that
  are invaluable for diagnosis. 

  It is the way of dreams to give us more than we ask, and this is true of
  those I have just cited as illustrations. They not only allowed us an insight
  into the causes of the neurosis, but afforded a prognosis as well. What is
  more, they showed us at what point the treatment should begin. The patient
  must be prevented from going full steam ahead. This is precisely what he
  tells himself in the dream. 

  For the time being we will content ourselves with this hint, and return to the
  question whether dreams enable us to explain the causes of a neurosis. I have
  cited two dreams that actually do this. But I could equally well cite any
  number of initial dreams which do nothing of the kind, although they are
  perfectly transparent. I do not wish for the present to consider dreams which
  call for searching analysis and interpretation. 

  The point is that there are neuroses whose actual origins we discover only at
  the very end of an analysis, and there are also cases in which it is of no
  benefit to have discovered the origin of the neurosis. This brings me back to
  the Freudian view, mentioned above, that for the purposes of therapy it is
  necessary for the patient to become conscious of the causal factors in his
  disturbance—a view that is little more than a survival of the old theory of
  the trauma. I do not, of course, deny that many neuroses have a traumatic
  origin; I simply contest the notion that all neuroses are of this nature and
  arise without exception from some crucial experience of childhood. This view
  of the question results in a causalistic approach. The doctor must give his
  whole attention to the patient’s past; he must always ask: “Why?”and neglect
  the equally pertinent question: “What for?” This is frequently very harmful
  to the patient, for he is forced to search in his memory—perhaps over a
  course of years—for a hypothetical event in his childhood, while things of
  immediate importance are grossly neglected. A purely causalistic approach is
  too narrow to do justice to the true significance, either of the dream, or of
  the neurosis. A person is biassed who turns to dreams for the sole purpose of
  discovering the hidden cause of the neurosis, for he leaves aside the larger
  part of the dream’s actual contribution. The dreams I have cited unmistakably
  present the ætiological factors in the neurosis; but it is clear that they
  also offer a prognosis or anticipation of the future and a suggestion as to
  the course of treatment as well. We must furthermore bear in mind that a
  great many dreams do not touch upon the causes of the neurosis, but treat of
  quite different matters—among others, of the patient’s attitude to the
  doctor. I should like to illustrate this by recounting three dreams of the
  same patient. She consulted three different analysts in turn, and at the
  beginning of each treatment she had one of these dreams. 

  Here is the first: “I must cross the frontier into the next country, but no one
  can tell me where the boundary lies, and I cannot find it.” The treatment
  which followed this dream was unsuccessful, and was soon broken off. The
  second dream is as follows: “I must cross the frontier. It is a black night,
  and I cannot find the custom house. After a long search I notice a small
  light far away and suppose that the frontier lies over there. But in order to
  reach it, I must cross a valley and pass through a dark wood, in which I lose
  my sense of direction. Then I notice that someone is with me. This person
  suddenly clings to me like a madman and I awake in terror.” That treatment
  also was discontinued after a few weeks, the reason being that the patient
  was completely disoriented by the analyst’s unconscious identification with
  her. 

  The third dream took place when the patient came into my hands. It runs: “I
  must cross a frontier, or rather, I have already crossed it, and find myself
  in a Swiss custom-house. I have only a handbag with me, and believe that I
  have nothing to declare. But the customs official dives into my bag and, to
  my astonishment, pulls out two full-sized mattresses.” The patient married
  during the course of her treatment with me, but not without a violent
  resistance to this step. The cause of her neurotic resistance came to light
  only after many months, and there is not a hint of it anywhere in these
  dreams. They are without exception anticipations of the difficulties she is
  to have with the analysts to whom she has come for treatment. 

  I could cite many other dreams to the same effect, but these may suffice to
  show that dreams can be anticipatory and, in that case, must lose their
  particular meaning if they are treated in a purely causalistic way. These
  three dreams give clear information about the analytical situation, and it is
  extremely important for the purposes of therapy that this be rightly
  understood. The first doctor understood the situation and sent the patient to
  the second. Here she drew her own conclusions from her dream, and decided to
  leave. My interpretation of her third dream disappointed her greatly, but she
  was distinctly encouraged to go on in spite of all difficulties by the fact
  that it reported the frontier already crossed. 

  Initial dreams are often amazingly transparent and clear-cut. But as the work
  of analysis progresses, the dreams in a little while cease to be clear. If
  they should prove exceptional, and keep their clarity, we can be sure that
  the analysis has as yet not touched some important part of the personality.
  As a rule, the dreams become less transparent, and more blurred, shortly
  after the beginning of the treatment. It becomes increasingly difficult to
  interpret them, a further reason for this being that a point may soon be
  reached where the doctor is unable, if the truth be told, to understand the
  situation as a whole. This is how the matter really stands, for to say that
  the dreams are unintelligible is a mere reflection of the doctor’s subjective
  opinion. Nothing is unclear to the understanding; it is only when we fail to
  understand that things appear unintelligible and confused. In themselves,
  dreams are clear—that is, they are just as they must be under the given
  conditions. If we look back at these “unintelligible” dreams from a later
  stage of the treatment or from a distance of some years, we are often
  astounded at our own blindness. It is a fact that, as an analysis progresses,
  we come upon dreams that are strikingly obscure in comparison with the
  initial dreams. But the doctor should not be too sure that these later dreams
  are really confused, or be too hasty in accusing the patient of deliberate
  resistance. He would do better to take the fact as an indication of his own
  growing inability to understand the situation. The psychiatrist likewise is
  prone to call a patient “confused” when he would do well to recognize the
  projection and admit his own confusion, for it is really his understanding
  that grows confused in face of the patient’s strange behaviour. For the
  purposes of therapy, moreover, it is highly important for the analyst to
  admit his lack of understanding from time to time, for nothing is more
  unbearable for the patient than to be always understood. The latter in any
  case relies too much upon the mysterious insight of the doctor, and, by
  appealing to his professional vanity, lays a dangerous trap for him. By
  taking refuge in the doctor’s self-confidence and “profound” understanding,
  the patient loses all sense of reality, falls into a stubborn transference,
  and retards the cure. 

  Understanding is clearly a subjective process. It may be very one-sided, in
  that the physician understands while the patient does not. In such a case the
  doctor sometimes feels it his duty to convince the patient, and if the latter
  will not allow himself to be convinced, the doctor accuses him of resistance.
  When the understanding is all on my side, I find it advisable to stress my
  lack of understanding. It is relatively unimportant whether the doctor
  understands or not, but everything hangs on the patient’s doing so. What is
  really needed is a mutual agreement which is the fruit of joint reflection.
  It is one-sided, and therefore dangerous, understanding for the doctor to
  prejudge the dream from the standpoint of a certain doctrine and to make a
  pronouncement which may be theoretically sound, but does not win the
  patient’s assent. In so far as the pronouncement fails in this respect, it is
  incorrect in the practical sense; and it may also be incorrect in the sense
  that it anticipates and thereby cripples the actual development of the
  patient. We appeal only to the patient’s brain if we try to inculcate a
  truth; but if we help him to grow up to this truth in the course of his own
  development, we have reached his heart, and this appeal goes deeper and acts
  with greater force. 

  When the doctor’s interpretation is based merely upon a onesided theory or a
  preconceived opinion, his chances of convincing the patient or of achieving
  any therapeutic results depend chiefly upon suggestion. And let no one
  deceive himself as to the effects of suggestion. In itself suggestion is not
  to be despised, but it has serious limitations, and reacts upon the patient’s
  independence of character in a very undesirable way. A practising analyst may
  be supposed to believe in the significance and value of the widening of
  consciousness—I mean by this the procedure of bringing to light the parts of
  the personality which were previously unconscious and subjecting them to
  conscious discrimination and criticism. It is an undertaking which requires
  the patient to face his problems, and taxes his powers of conscious judgement
  and decision. It is nothing less than a challenge to the ethical sense, a
  call to arms that must be answered by the whole personality. Therefore, with
  respect to personal development, the analytical approach is of a higher order
  than methods of treatment based upon suggestion. This is a kind of magic that
  works in the dark and makes no ethical demands upon the personality. Methods
  of treatment based upon suggestion are deceptive makeshifts; they are
  incompatible with the principles of analytical therapy, and should be
  avoided. But suggestion can of course be avoided only when the doctor is
  aware of the many doors through which it can enter. There remains in the best
  of circumstances enough—and more than enough—unconscious suggestion. 

  The analyst who wishes to rule out conscious suggestion must consider any
  dream interpretation invalid that does not win the assent of the patient, and
  he must search until he finds a formulation that does. This is a rule which,
  I believe, must always be observed, especially in dealing with those dreams
  whose obscurity is evidence of lack of understanding on the part of the
  doctor as well as of the patient. The doctor should regard every dream as a
  new departure—as a source of information about unknown conditions concerning
  which he has as much to learn as the patient. It goes without saying that he
  should hold no preconceived opinions based upon a particular theory, but
  stand ready in every single case to construct a totally new theory of dreams.
  There is still a boundless opportunity for pioneer-work in this field. The
  view that dreams are merely imaginary fulfilments of suppressed wishes has
  long ago been superseded. It is certainly true that there are dreams which
  embody suppressed wishes and fears, but what is there which the dream cannot
  on occasion embody? Dreams may give expression to ineluctable truths, to
  philosophical pronouncements, illusions, wild fantasies, memories, plans,
  anticipations, irrational experiences, even telepathic visions, and heaven
  knows what besides. One thing we ought never to forget: almost the half of
  our lives is passed in a more or less unconscious state. The dream is
  specifically the utterance of the unconscious. We may call consciousness the
  daylight realm of the human psyche, and contrast it with the nocturnal realm
  of unconscious psychic activity which we apprehend as dreamlike fantasy. It
  is certain that consciousness consists not only of wishes and fears, but of
  vastly more than these, and it is highly probable that the unconscious psyche
  contains a wealth of contents and living forms equal to or even greater than
  does consciousness, which is characterized by concentration, limitation and
  exclusion. This being the state of affairs, it is imperative that we should
  not pare down the meaning of a dream to fit some narrow doctrine. We must
  remember that there are not a few patients who imitate the technical or
  theoretical jargon of the doctor, and do this even in their dreams. No
  language exists that cannot be misused. It is hard to realize how badly we
  are fooled by the abuse of ideas; it even seems as if the unconscious had a
  way of strangling the physician in the coils of his own theory. All this
  being so, I leave theory aside as much as possible in analysing dreams. We
  cannot, of course, dispense with theory entirely, for it is needed to make
  things intelligible. It is on the basis of theory, for instance, that I
  expect dreams to have a meaning. I cannot prove in every case that dreams are
  meaningful, for there are dreams that neither doctor nor patient understands.
  But I must regard them as hypothetically meaningful in order to find courage
  to deal with them at all. To say that dreams contribute in an important way
  to conscious knowledge, and that a dream which fails to do so is a dream
  which has not been properly interpreted—this, too, is a theoretical
  statement. But I must adopt this hypothesis in order to make it clear to
  myself why I analyse dreams. On the other hand, every hypothesis about the
  nature of the dream, its function and structure, is merely a rule of thumb
  and must be subject to constant modifications. We must never forget in dream-
  analysis, even for a moment, that we move on treacherous ground where nothing
  is certain but uncertainty. A suitable warning to the dream-interpreter—if
  only it were not so paradoxical—would be “Do anything you like, only don’t
  try to understand!”.

  When we take up an obscure dream, our first task is not to understand and
  interpret it, but to establish the context with minute care. What I have in
  mind is not a boundless sweep of “free associations” starting from any and
  every image in the dream, but a careful and conscious illumination of those
  chains of association that are directly connected with particular images.
  Many patients have first to be educated to this task, for they resemble the
  doctor in their urgent desire to understand and to interpret offhand. This is
  particularly the case when they have already been educated — or rather,
  miseducated—by their reading or by a previous analysis that went wrong. They
  give associations in accordance with a theory; that is, they try to
  understand and interpret, and thus they nearly always get stuck. Like the
  doctor, they wish at once to get behind the dream in the false belief that it
  is a mere façade concealing the true meaning. Perhaps we may call the dream a
  façade, but we must remember that the fronts of most houses by no means trick
  or deceive us, but, on the contrary, follow the plan of the building and
  often betray its inner arrangement. The “manifest” dream-picture is the dream
  itself, and contains the “latent” meaning. If I find sugar in the urine, it
  is sugar, and not a façade that conceals albumen. When Freud speaks of the
  “dream-façade”, he is really speaking, not of the dream itself, but of its
  obscurity, and in so doing is projecting upon the dream his own lack of
  understanding. We say that the dream has a false front only because we fail
  to see into it. We would do better to say that we are dealing with something
  like a text that is unintelligible, not because it has a facade, but simply
  because we cannot read it. We do not have to get behind such a text in the
  first place, but must learn to read it. 

  We shall best succeed in reading dreams by establishing their context, as
  already remarked. We shall not succeed with the help of free associations,
  any more than we could use that means to decipher a Hittite inscription. Free
  associations will help me to uncover all my own complexes, but for this
  purpose I need not start from the dream—I might as well take a sentence in a
  newspaper or a “Keep out” sign. If we associate freely to a dream, our
  complexes will turn up right enough, but we shall hardly ever discover the
  meaning of the dream. To do this, we must keep as close as possible to the
  dream-images themselves. When a person has dreamed of a deal table, little is
  accomplished by his associating it with his writing-desk which is not made of
  deal. The dream refers expressly to a deal table. If at this point nothing
  occurs to the dreamer his hesitation signifies that a particular darkness
  surrounds the dream-image, and this is suspicious. We would expect him to
  have dozens of associations to a deal table, and when he cannot find a single
  one, this must have a meaning. In such cases we should return again and again
  to the image. I say to my patients: “Suppose I had no idea what the words
  ‘deal table’ mean. Describe this object and give me its history in such a way
  that I cannot fail to understand what sort of thing it is.” We succeed in
  this way in establishing a good part of the context of that particular
  dream-image. When we have done this for all the images in the dream, we are
  ready for the venture of interpretation. 

  Every interpretation is hypothetical, for it is a mere attempt to read an
  unfamiliar text. An obscure dream, taken by itself, can rarely be interpreted
  with any certainty, so that I attach little importance to the interpretation
  of single dreams. With a series of dreams we can have more confidence in our
  interpretations, for the later dreams correct the mistakes we have made in
  handling those that went before. We are also better able, in a dream series,
  to recognize the important contents and basic themes, and I therefore urge my
  patients to make a careful record of their dreams and the interpretations
  given them. I also show them how to work up their dreams in the way I have
  just indicated, so that they can bring me in writing the dream and the
  material that forms the context of the dream. In later stages of analysis I
  let them work out the interpretations as well. The patient learns in this way
  how to consult the unconscious without the doctor’s help. 

  If dreams did nothing more than inform us about the causal factors in a
  neurosis, we could safely let the doctor handle them alone. My way of dealing
  with them, moreover, would be quite superfluous if all that we could expect
  of them were a collection of hints and insights helpful to the doctor. But
  since it is probable, as I have shown in a few examples, that dreams contain
  more than practical helps for the doctor, dream-analysis deserves very
  special consideration. Sometimes, indeed, it is a matter of life and death. 

  Among many cases of this sort, I have been especially impressed with one that
  concerned a colleague of mine in Zürich. He was a man somewhat older than
  myself whom I saw from time to time, and who always teased me on these
  occasions about my interest in dream-interpretation. I met him one day in the
  street, and he called out to me: “How are things going? Are you still
  interpreting dreams? By the way, I’ve had another idiotic dream. Does it mean
  something too?” He had dreamed as follows: “I am climbing a high mountain
  over steep, snowcovered slopes. I mount higher and higher—it is marvellous
  weather. The higher I climb, the better I feel. I think: ‘If only I could go
  on climbing like this for ever!’ When I reach the summit, my happiness and
  elation are so strong that I feel I could mount right up into space. And I
  discover that I actually can do this. I go on climbing on empty air. I awake
  in a real ecstasy.” When he had told me his dream, I said: “My dear man, I
  know you can’t give up mountaineering, but let me implore you not to go alone
  from now on. When you go, take two guides, and you must promise on your word
  of honour to follow their directions.” “Incorrigible!” he replied laughing,
  and said goodbye. I never saw him again. Two months later came the first
  blow. When out alone, he was buried by an avalanche, but was dug out in the
  nick of time by a military patrol which happened to come along. Three months
  after this the end came. He went on a climb accompanied by a younger friend,
  but without guides. An alpinist standing below saw him literally step out
  into the air as he was letting himself down a rock wall. He fell on to the
  head of his friend, who was waiting beneath him, and both were dashed to
  pieces far below. That was ecstasis in the full meaning of the word. 

  No amount of scepticism and critical reserve has ever enabled me to regard
  dreams as negligible occurrences. Often enough they appear senseless, but it
  is obviously we who lack the sense and the ingenuity to read the enigmatical
  message from the nocturnal realm of the psyche. When we see that at least a
  half of man’s life is passed in this realm, that consciousness has its roots
  there, and that the unconscious operates in and out of waking existence, it
  would seem incumbent upon medical psychology to sharpen its perceptions by a
  systematic study of dreams. No one doubts the importance of conscious
  experience; why then should we question the importance of unconscious
  happenings? They also belong to human life, and they are sometimes more truly
  a part of it for weal or woe than any events of the day. Dreams give
  information about the secrets of the inner life and reveal to the dreamer
  hidden factors of his personality. As long as these are undiscovered, they
  disturb his waking life and betray themselves only in the form of symptoms.
  This means that we cannot effectively treat the patient from the side of
  consciousness alone, but must bring about a change in and through the
  unconscious. As far as present knowledge goes, there is only one way of doing
  this: there must be a thorough-going, conscious assimilation of unconscious
  contents. By “assimilation”, I mean a mutual interpenetration of conscious
  and unconscious contents, and not—as is too commonly thought—a one-sided
  valuation, interpretation and deformation of unconscious contents by the
  conscious mind. As to the value and significance of unconscious contents in
  general, very mistaken views are abroad. It is well known that the Freudian
  school presents the unconscious in a thoroughly depreciatory light, just as
  also it looks on primitive man as little better than a wild beast. Its
  nursery-tales about the terrible old man of the tribe and its teachings about
  the “infantile-perverse-criminal” unconscious have led people to make a
  dangerous monster out of the unconscious, that really very natural thing. As
  if all that is good, reasonable, beautiful and worth living for had taken up
  its abode in consciousness! 

  Have the horrors of the World War rally not opened our eyes? Are we still
  unable to see that man’s conscious mind is even more devilish and perverse
  than the unconscious? 
  
  I was recently reproached with the charge that my teaching about the
  assimilation of the unconscious, were it accepted, would undermine culture
  and exalt primitivity at the cost of our highest values. Such an opinion can
  have no foundation other than the erroneous belief that the unconscious is a
  monster. Such a view arises from fear of nature and of life as it actually
  is. Freud has invented the idea of sublimation to save us from the imaginary
  claws of the unconscious. But what actually exists cannot be alchemistically
  sublimated, and if anything is apparently sublimated, it never was what a
  false interpretation took it to be. 

  The unconscious is not a demonic monster, but a thing of nature that is
  perfectly neutral as far as moral sense, æsthetic taste and intellectual
  judgement go. It is dangerous only when our conscious attitude towards it
  becomes hopelessly false. And this danger grows in the measure that we
  practise repressions. But as soon as the patient begins to assimilate the
  contents that were previously unconscious, the danger from the side of the
  unconscious diminishes. As the process of assimilation goes on, it puts an
  end to the dissociation of the personality and to the anxiety that attends
  and inspires the separation of the two realms of the psyche. That which my
  critic feared—I mean the overwhelming of consciousness by the unconscious—is
  most likely to occur when the unconscious is excluded from life by
  repressions, or is misunderstood and depreciated. 

  A fundamental mistake, and one which is commonly made, is this: it is
  supposed that the contents of the unconscious are unequivocal and are marked
  with plus or minus signs that are immutable. As I see the question, this view
  is too naïve. The psyche is a self-regulating system that maintains itself in
  equilibrium as the body does. Every process that goes too far immediately and
  inevitably calls forth a compensatory activity. Without such adjustments a
  normal metabolism would not exist, nor would the normal psyche. We can take
  the idea of compensation, so understood, as a law of psychic happening. Too
  little on one side results in too much on the other. The relation between
  conscious and unconscious is compensatory. This fact, which is easily
  verifiable, affords a rule for dream interpretation. It is always helpful,
  when we set out to interpret a dream, to ask: What conscious attitude does it
  compensate? 

  Although compensation may take the form of imaginary wish-fulfilment, it
  generally presents itself as an actuality which becomes the more strikingly
  actual the more we try to repress it. We know that we do not conquer thirst
  by repressing it. The dream-content is to be taken in all seriousness as
  something that has actually happened to us; it should be treated as a
  contributory factor in framing our conscious outlook. If we do not do this,
  we shall keep that one-sided, conscious attitude which evoked the unconscious
  compensation in the first place. But this way holds little hope of our ever
  judging ourselves correctly or finding any balance in life. 

  If anyone should set out to replace his conscious outlook by the dictates of
  the unconscious—and this is the prospect which my critics find so alarming—he
  would only succeed in repressing the former, and it would reappear as an
  unconscious compensation. The unconscious would thus have changed its face
  and completely reversed its position. It would have become timidly
  reasonable, in striking contrast to its former tone. It is not generally
  believed that the unconscious operates in this way, yet such reversals
  constantly take place and constitute its essential function. This is why
  every dream is a source of information and a means of self-regulation, and
  why dreams are our most effective aids in the task of building up the
  personality. 

  The unconscious itself does not harbour explosive materials, but it may
  become explosive owing to the repressions exercised by a self-sufficient, or
  cowardly, conscious outlook. All the more reason, then, for giving heed to
  that side! It should now be clear why I have made it a practical rule always
  to ask, before trying to interpret a dream: What conscious attitude does it
  compensate? As may be seen, I thus bring the dream into the closest possible
  connection with the conscious state. I even maintain that it is impossible to
  interpret a dream with any degree of certainty unless we know what the
  conscious situation is. For it is only in the light of this knowledge that we
  can make out whether the unconscious content carries a plus or minus sign.
  The dream is not an isolated psychic event completely cut off from daily
  life. If it seems so to us, that is only an illusion that arises from our
  lack of understanding. In reality, the relation between consciousness and the
  dream is strictly causal, and they interact in the subtlest of ways. 

  I should like to show with the help of an illustration how important it is to
  find the true value of unconscious contents. A young man brought me the
  following dream: “My father is driving away from the house in his new car. He
  drives very clumsily, and I get very excited about his apparent stupidity. He
  goes this way and that, forward and backward, repeatedly getting the car into
  a tight place. Finally he runs into a wall and badly damages the car. I shout
  at him in a perfect rage, telling him he ought to behave himself. My father
  only laughs, and then I see that he is dead drunk.” There is no foundation in
  fact for the dream. The dreamer is convinced that his father would never
  behave in that way, even if he were drunk. The dreamer himself is used to
  cars; he is a careful driver, and very moderate in the use of alcohol,
  especially when he has to drive. Bad driving, and even slight injuries to the
  car, irritate him greatly. The son’s relation to his father is good. He
  admires him for being an unusually successful man. We can say, without any
  attempt at interpretation, that the dream presents a very unfavourable
  picture of the father. What, then, should we take its meaning to be as far as
  the son is concerned? Is his relation to his father good only in appearance,
  and does it really consist of over-compensated resistances? If this is so we
  should attribute a plus sign to the dream-content; we should have to tell the
  young man: “This is your actual relation to your father.” But since I could
  find nothing equivocal or neurotic in the facts about the son’s relation to
  his father, I had no warrant for disturbing the young man’s feelings with
  such a destructive pronouncement. To do so would have prejudiced the outcome
  of the treatment. 

  But if his relation to his father is really excellent, why must the dream
  manufacture such an improbable story to discredit the father? The dreamer’s
  unconscious must have a distinct tendency to produce such a dream. Has the
  young man resistances to his father, after all, which are perhaps fed by
  jealousy or a certain sense of inferiority? But before we go out of our way
  to burden his conscience—and with sensitive young people there is always the
  risk that we do this too lightly—we had better, for once, drop the question
  of why he had this dream, and ask ourselves instead: What for? The answer, in
  this case, would be that his unconscious clearly tries to depreciate his
  father. If we take this as a compensation, we are forced to the conclusion
  that his relation to his father is not only good, but even too good. The
  young man actually deserves the French sobriquet of fils à papa. His father
  is still too much the guarantor of his existence, and he is still living what
  I call a provisional life. He runs the risk of failing to realize himself
  because there is too much “father” on every side. This is why the unconscious
  manufactures a kind of blasphemy: it seeks to lower the father and to elevate
  the son. “An immoral business”, we may be tempted to say. Every father who
  lacks insight would be on his guard here. And yet this compensation is
  entirely to the point. It forces the son to contrast himself with his father,
  and that is the only way in which he can become aware of himself. The
  interpretation just outlined was apparently the correct one, for it struck
  home. It won the spontaneous assent of the young man, and did no violence to
  his feeling for his father, or to the father’s feeling for him. But this
  interpretation was only possible when the father-son relation had been
  studied in the light of all the facts that were accessible to consciousness.
  Without a knowledge of the conscious situation the true meaning of the dream
  would have remained in doubt. 

  It is of the first importance for the assimilation of dreamcontents that no
  violence be done to the real values of the conscious personality. If the
  conscious personality is destroyed, or even crippled, there is no one left to
  do the assimilating. When we recognize the importance of the unconscious we
  are not embarking upon a Bolshevist experiment which puts the lowest on top.
  This would only bring about a return of the situation we are trying to
  correct. We must see to it that the conscious personality remains intact, for
  we can only turn the unconscious compensations to good account when the
  conscious personality co-operates in the venture. When it comes to the
  assimilation of a content it is never a question of “this or that”, but of
  “this and that”. 

  Just as the interpretation of dreams requires exact knowledge of the
  conscious status quo, so the treatment of dream symbolism demands that we
  take into account the dreamer’s philosophical, religious and moral
  convictions. It is far wiser in practice not to regard the dream-symbols as
  signs or symptoms of a fixed character. We should rather take them as true
  symbols—that is to say, as expressions of something not yet consciously
  recognized or conceptually formulated. In addition to this, they must be
  considered in relation to the dreamer’s immediate state of consciousness. I
  emphasize that this way of treating the dream-symbols is advisable in
  practice because theoretically there do exist relatively fixed symbols whose
  meaning must on no account be referred to anything whose content is known, or
  to anything that can be formulated in concepts. If there were no relatively
  fixed symbols, it would be impossible to determine the structure of the
  unconscious. There would be nothing in it which could be in any way laid hold
  of or described. It may seem strange that I should attribute an indefinite
  content to the relatively fixed symbols. But it is the indefinite content
  that marks the symbol as against the mere sign or symptom. It is well known
  that the Freudian school operates with hard and fast sexual “symbols”; but
  these are just what I should call signs, for they are made to stand for
  sexuality, and this is supposed to be something definitive. As a matter of
  fact, Freud’s concept of sexuality is thoroughly elastic, and so vague that
  it can be made to include almost anything. The word itself is familiar, but
  what it denotes amounts to an indeterminable or variable x that stands for
  the physiological activity of the glands at one extreme and the highest
  reaches of the spirit at the other. Instead of taking a dogmatic stand that
  rests upon the illusion that we know something because we have a familiar
  word for it, I prefer to regard the symbol as the announcement of something
  unknown, hard to recognize and not to be fully determined. Take, for
  instance, the so-called phallic symbols, which are supposed to stand for the
  /membrum virile/ and nothing more. Psychologically speaking, the /membrum/ is
  itself—as Kranefeldt has recently pointed out—a symbolic image whose wider
  content cannot easily be determined. As was customary throughout antiquity,
  primitive people today make a free use of phallic symbols, yet it never
  occurs to them to confuse the phallus, as a ritualistic symbol, with the
  penis. They always take the phallus to mean the creative /mana/, the power of
  healing and fertility, “that which is unusually potent”, to use Lehmann’s
  expression. Its equivalents in mythology and in dreams are the bull, the ass,
  the pomegranate, the yoni, the he-goat, the lightning, the horse’s hoof, the
  dance, the magical cohabitation in the furrow, and the menstrual fluid, to
  mention only a few of many. That which underlies all of these images—and
  sexuality itself—is an archetypal content that is hard to grasp, and that
  finds its best psychological expression in the primitive /mana/ symbol. In
  each of the images given above we can see a relatively fixed symbol—i.e. the
  mana symbol—but we cannot for all that be certain that when they occur in
  dreams they have no other meaning. 

  The practical need may call for quite another interpretation. To be sure, if
  we had to interpret dreams in an exhaustive way according to scientific
  principles, we should have to refer every such symbol to an archetype. But,
  in practice, this kind of interpretation might be a grave blunder, for the
  patient’s psychological state may require anything rather than the giving of
  attention to a theory of dreams. It is therefore advisable, for the purposes
  of therapy, to look for the meaning of symbols as they relate to the
  conscious situation—in other words, to treat them as if they were not fixed.
  This is as much as to say that we must renounce all preconceived opinions,
  however knowing they make us feel, and try to discover the meaning of things
  for the patient. If we do this, our interpretations will obviously not go
  very far towards satisfying a theory of dreams; in fact, they may fall very
  short in this respect. But if the practitioner operates too much with fixed
  symbols, there is danger of his falling into mere routine and dogmatism, thus
  failing to meet the patient’s need. It is unfortunate that, to illustrate the
  above, I should have to go into greater detail than space here permits, but I
  have elsewhere published illustrative material that amply supports my
  statements. 

  As already remarked, it frequently happens at the very beginning of a
  treatment that a dream reveals to the doctor, in a wide perspective, the
  general direction in which the unconscious is moving. But, for practical
  reasons, it may not be feasible to make clear to the patient, at this early
  stage, the deeper meaning of his dream. The demands of therapy are binding
  upon us in this way also. When the doctor gains such a far-reaching insight,
  it is thanks to his experience in the matter of relatively fixed symbols.
  Such insight can be of the very greatest value in diagnosis and in prognosis
  as well. I was once consulted in the case of a seventeen-year-old girl. One
  specialist had suggested that she might be in the first stages of progressive
  atrophy of the muscles, while another thought that she was a hysteric.
  Because of this second opinion, I was called in. The clinical picture made me
  suspect an organic disease, but the girl showed traits of hysteria as well. I
  asked for dreams. The patient answered at once: “Yes, I have terrible dreams.
  Just recently I dreamed I was coming home at night. Everything is as quiet as
  death. The door into the livingroom is half open, and I see my mother hanging
  from the chandelier and swinging to and fro in a cold wind that blows in
  through the open windows. At another time I dreamed that a terrible noise
  breaks out in the house at night. I go to see what has happened, and find
  that a frightened horse is tearing through the rooms. At last it finds the
  door into the hall, and jumps through the hall window from the fourth floor
  down into the street. I was terrified to see it lying below, all mangled.” 

  The way in which these dreams allude to death is enough to give one pause.
  But many persons have anxiety dreams now and then. We must therefore look
  more closely into the meaning of the outstanding symbols, “mother” and
  “horse”. These figures must be equivalent one to the other, for they both do
  the same thing: they commit suicide. The mother symbol is archetypal and
  refers to a place of origin, to nature, that which passively creates, hence
  to substance and matter, to material nature, the lower body (womb) and the
  vegetative functions. It connotes also the unconscious, natural and
  instinctive life, the physiological realm, the body in which we dwell or are
  contained, for the “mother” is also a vessel, the hollow form (uterus) that
  carries and nourishes, and it thus stands for the foundations of
  consciousness. Being within something or contained in something suggests
  darkness, the nocturnal—a state of anxiety. With these allusions I am
  presenting the idea of the mother in many of its mythological and
  etymological transformations; I am also giving an important part of the yin
  concept of Chinese philosophy. All this is dream-content, but it is not
  something which the seventeen-year-old girl has acquired in her individual
  existence; it is rather a bequest from the past. On the one hand it has been
  kept alive by the language, and on the other hand it is inherited with the
  structure of the psyche and is therefore to be found in al times and among all
  peoples.

  The familiar word “mother” refers apparently to the bestknown of mothers in
  particular—to “my mother”. But the mother symbol points to a darker meaning
  which eludes conceptual formulation and can only be vaguely apprehended as
  the hidden, nature-bound life of the body. Yet even this expression is too
  narrow, and excludes too many pertinent side-meanings. The psychic reality
  which underlies this symbol is so inconceivably complex that we can only
  discern it from afar off, and then but very dimly. It is such realities that
  call for symbolic expression. If we apply our findings to the dream, its
  meaning will be: the unconscious life destroys itself. That is the dream’s
  message to the conscious mind of the dreamer and to everyone who has ears to
  hear. 

  “Horse” is an archetype that is widely current in mythology and folk-lore. As
  an animal it represents the non-human psyche, the sub-human, animal side, and
  therefore the unconscious. This is why the horse in folk lore sometimes sees
  visions, hears voices, and speaks. As a beast of burden it is closely related
  to the mother-archetype; the Valkyries bear the dead hero to Valhalla and the
  Trojan horse encloses the Greeks. As an animal lower than man it represents
  the lower part of the body and the animal drives that take their rise from
  there. The horse is dynamic power and a means of locomotion; it carries one
  away like a surge of instinct. It is subject to panics like all instinctive
  creatures who lack higher consciousness. Also it has to do with sorcery and
  magical spells—especially the black, night horse which heralds death. 

  It is evident, then, that “horse” is the equivalent of “mother” with a slight
  shift of meaning. The mother stands for life at its origin, and the horse for
  the merely animal life of the body. If we apply this meaning to the dream, it
  says: the animal life destroys itself. 

  The two dreams make nearly the same assertion, but, as is usually the case,
  the second is more specific. The peculiar subtlety of the dream is brought
  out in both instances: there is no mention of the death of the individual. It
  is notorious that one often dreams of one’s own death, but that is no serious
  matter. When it is really a question of death, the dream speaks another
  language. Both of these dreams, then, point to a serious, and even fatal,
  organic disease. The prognosis was shortly after borne out in fact. 

  As for the relatively fixed symbols, this example gives a fair idea of their
  general nature. There are a great many of them, and they may differ in
  individual cases by subtle shifts of meaning. It is only through comparative
  studies in mythology, folk-lore, religion and language that we can determine
  these symbols in a scientific way. The evolutionary stages through which the
  human psyche has passed are more clearly discernible in the dream than in
  consciousness. 

  The dream speaks in images, and gives expression to instincts, that are
  derived from the most primitive levels of nature. Consciousness all too
  easily departs from the law of nature; but it can be brought again into
  harmony with the latter by the assimilation of unconscious contents. By
  fostering this process we lead the patient to the rediscovery of the law of
  his own being. 

  I have not been able, in so short a space, to deal with anything but the
  elements of the subject. I could not put together before your eyes, stone by
  stone, the edifice that is reared in every analysis from the materials of the
  unconscious and finds its completion in the restoration of the total
  personality. The way of successive assimilations reaches far beyond the
  curative results that specifically concern the doctor. It leads in the end to
  that distant goal (which may perhaps have been the first urge to life), the
  bringing into reality of the whole human being—that is, individuation. We
  physicians are without doubt the first scientific observers of these obscure
  processes of nature. As a rule we see only a pathological phase of the
  development, and lose sight of the patient as soon as he is cured. But it is
  only when the cure has been effected that we are in a position to study the
  normal process of change, itself a matter of years or decades. If we had some
  knowledge of the ends towards which unconscious, psychic growth is tending,
  and if our psychological insight were not drawn exclusively from the
  pathological phase, we should have a less confused idea of the processes
  revealed by dreams and a clearer recognition of what it is that the symbols
  point to. In my opinion, every doctor should be aware of the fact that
  psychotherapy in general, and analysis in particular, is a procedure that
  breaks into a purposeful and continuous development, now here and now there,
  and thus singles out particular phases which may seem to follow opposing
  courses. Since every analysis by itself shows only one part or aspect of the
  deeper course of development, nothing but hopeless confusion can result from
  casuistic comparisons. For this reason I have preferred to confine myself to
  the rudiments of the subject and to practical considerations. It is only in
  actual contact with the facts as they occur that we can come to anything like
  a satisfactory agreement. 


* Problems of modern Psychotherapy
  Psychotherapy, or the treatment of the mind by psychological methods, is
  identified in popular thought today with “psychoanalysis”. This word is now
  so widely accepted that everyone who uses it seems at the same time to grasp
  its meaning; yet it is seldom that a layman knows precisely what it covers. 

  According to the intention of its creator, Freud, it can be appropriately
  applied only to his own particular method of explaining psychic symptoms in
  terms of certain repressed impulses. Inasmuch as this technique is the
  consequence of a particular approach to life, the idea of psychoanalysis
  includes certain theoretical assumptions, among them the Freudian theory of
  sexuality. The founder of psychoanalysis himself explicitly insists upon this
  circumscription. But, Freud notwithstanding, the layman applies the concept
  of psychoanalysis to every kind of modern endeavour to probe the mind by
  scientific methods. Thus Adler’s school must submit to being labelled
  “psychoanalytic” despite the fact that Adler’s view-point and method are
  apparently in irreconcilable opposition to those of Freud. Because of this
  contrast, Adler himself does not call his teaching “psychoanalysis”, but
  “individual psychology”; while I prefer to call my own approach “analytical
  psychology”. I wish the term to stand for a general conception embracing both
  “psychoanalysis” and “individual psychology”, as well as other efforts in
  this field. 

  Since the mind is common to mankind it may seem to the layman that there can
  be only one psychology, and he may therefore suppose the divergences between
  the schools to be either subjective quibbling, or else a commonplace disguise
  for the efforts of mediocrities who seek to exalt themselves upon a throne. I
  could easily lengthen the list of “psychologies” by mentioning other systems
  that are not to be included under the head of “analytical psychology”. There
  are, in fact, many methods, stand-points, views and convictions which are all
  at war with one another—the main reason for this being that, since they fail
  to be mutually comprehensible, none of them can grant the validity of any
  other. The many-sidedness and variety of psychological opinions in our time
  is nothing less than astonishing, and it is confusing for the layman that no
  general survey of them can be made. 

  When we find the most diverse remedies prescribed in a textbook of pathology
  for a given disease, we may confidently assume that none of these remedies is
  particularly efficacious. So, when many different ways of approaching the
  psyche are recommended, we may rest assured that none of them leads with
  absolute certainty to the goal, least of all those advocated in a fanatical
  way. The very number of present-day “psychologies” amounts to a confession of
  perplexity. The difficulty of gaining access to the mind is gradually borne
  in upon us, and the mind itself is seen to be, to use Nietzsche’s expression,
  a “horned” problem. It is small wonder therefore that efforts to attack this
  elusive riddle are multiplied, first from one side and then from another. The
  variety of contradictory standpoints and opinions of which we have spoken is
  the inevitable result. The reader will doubtless agree that in discussing
  psychoanalysis we should not limit ourselves to its narrower definition, but
  deal in general with the results and failures of the various contemporary
  endeavours to solve the problem of the psyche—endeavours which we have agreed
  shall all be embraced in the concept of analytical psychology. 

  And moreover, why is there suddenly so much interest in the human psyche as
  something to be experienced? This has not been the case for thousands of
  years. I wish merely to raise this apparently irrelevant question, and will
  not try to answer it. It is in reality not irrelevant, because this interest
  underlies all such modern movements as theosophy, occultism, astrology and so
  forth. 

  All that is embraced today in the layman’s idea of “psychoanalysis”
  originated in medical practice; and consequently most of it is medical
  psychology. It bears the unmistakable imprint of the physician’s
  consulting-room—a fact which is evident not only in its terminology, but also
  in its framework of theory. We constantly come upon postulates which the
  physician has taken over from natural science and in particular from biology.
  This fact has largely contributed to the hostility between modern psychology
  and the academic fields of philosophy, history and classical learning. 

  Modern psychology is empirical and close to nature, while these studies are
  grounded in the intellect. The distance between nature and mind, difficult to
  bridge at best, is increased by a medical and biological nomenclature which
  sometimes appears of practical utility, but more often severely taxes our
  good-will. 

  In view of the confusion of concepts that exists, I have felt it necessary to
  indulge in the foregoing general remarks. I should like now to turn to the
  task in hand and consider the actual achievements of analytical psychology.
  Since the various endeavours embraced by this term are so heterogeneous, it
  is extremely difficult to take up a generally inclusive standpoint. If, then,
  with regard to the aims and results of these endeavours, I try to distinguish
  certain classes, or rather stages, I do it with some reservation. I regard it
  as a merely provisional arrangement, and grant that it may seem as arbitrary
  as a surveyor’s triangulation of a country. Be that as it may, I venture to
  arrange the sum-total of findings under the four heads of confession,
  explanation, education, and transformation. I shall now proceed to discuss
  the meaning of these somewhat unusual terms. 

  The first beginnings of all analytical treatment are to be found in its
  prototype, the confessional. Since, however, the two practices have no direct
  causal connection, but rather grow from a common psychic root, it is
  difficult for an outsider to see at once the relation between the groundwork
  of psychoanalysis and the religious institution of the confessional. 

  As soon as man was capable of conceiving the idea of sin, he had recourse to
  psychic concealment—or, to put it in analytical language, repressions arose.
  Anything that is concealed is a secret. The maintenance of secrets acts like
  a psychic poison which alienates their possessor from the community. In small
  doses, this poison may actually be a priceless remedy, even an essential
  preliminary to the differentiation of the individual. This is so much the
  case that, even on a primitive level, man has felt an irresistible need to
  invent secrets; their possession saves him from dissolving in the
  unconsciousness of mere community life, and thus from a fatal psychic injury.
  As is well known, the many ancient mystery cults with their secret rituals
  served this instinct for differentiation. Even the Christian sacraments were
  looked upon as mysteries in the early Church, and, as in the case of baptism,
  were celebrated in private apartments and only referred to under a veil of
  allegory. 

  However beneficial a secret shared with several persons may be, a merely
  private secret has a destructive effect. It resembles a burden of guilt which
  cuts off the unfortunate possessor from communion with his fellow-beings. Yet
  if we are conscious of what we conceal, the harm done is decidedly less than
  if we do not know what we are repressing—or even that we have repressions at
  all. In the latter case we not merely keep a content consciously private, but
  we conceal it even from ourselves. It then splits off from consciousness as
  an independent complex, to lead a separate existence in the unconscious,
  where it can be neither corrected nor interfered with by the conscious mind.
  The complex is thus an autonomous portion of the psyche which, as experience
  has shown, develops a peculiar fantasy-life of its own. What we call fantasy
  is simply spontaneous psychic activity; and it wells up whenever the
  repressive action of the conscious mind relaxes or ceases altogether, as in
  sleep. In sleep this activity shows itself in the form of dreams. And we
  continue to dream in waking life beneath the threshold of consciousness,
  especially when this activity is conditioned by a repressed or otherwise
  unconscious complex. It should be said in passing that unconscious contents
  are by no means exclusively such as were once conscious and, by being
  repressed, have later grown into unconscious complexes. Quite otherwise, the
  unconscious has contents peculiar to itself which, slowly growing upward from
  the depths, at last come into consciousness. We should therefore in no wise
  picture the unconscious psyche to ourselves as a mere receptacle for contents
  discarded by the conscious mind. 

  All psychic contents which either approach the threshold of consciousness
  from below, or have sunk only slightly beneath it, have an effect upon our
  conscious activities. Since the content itself is not conscious, these
  effects are necessarily indirect. Most of our lapses of the tongue, of the
  pen, of memory, and the like, are traceable to these disturbances, as are
  likewise all neurotic symptoms. These are nearly always of psychic origin,
  the exceptions being shock effects from shell-explosions and other causes.
  The mildest forms of neurosis are the “lapses” already referred to—blunders
  of speech, the sudden forgetting of names and dates, unexpected clumsiness
  leading to injuries or accidents, misunderstandings of personal motives or of
  what we have heard or read, and so-called hallucinations of memory which
  cause us to suppose erroneously that we have said or done this or that. In
  all these cases a thorough investigation can show the existence of a content
  which in an indirect and unconscious way has distorted the conscious
  performance. 

  In general, therefore, an unconscious secret is more harmful than one that is
  conscious. I have seen many patients in difficult situations of life which
  might have driven weaker natures to suicide. These patients had at times a
  tendency towards suicide, but, on account of their inherent reasonableness,
  would not allow the suicidal urge to come into consciousness. But it remained
  active in the unconscious, and brought about all kinds of dangerous
  accidents—as for instance an attack of faintness or hesitation in front of an
  advancing motor-car, the swallowing of corrosive sublimate in the belief that
  it was a cough mixture, a sudden zest for dangerous acrobatics, and so forth.
  When it was possible to make the suicidal leaning conscious, common-sense
  could helpfully intervene; the patients could then recognize and avoid those
  situations that tempted them to self-destruction. 

  As we have seen, every personal secret has the effect of a sin or of
  guilt—whether or not it is, from the standpoint of popular morality, a
  wrongful secret. Now another form of concealment is the act of
  “withholding” -- it being usually emotions that are withheld. As in the case of
  secrets, so here also we must make a reservation: self-restraint is healthful
  and beneficial; it is even a virtue. This is why we find self-discipline to
  have been one of man’s earliest moral attainments. Among primitive peoples it
  has its place in the initiation ceremonies, chiefly in the forms of ascetic
  continence and the stoical endurance of pain and fear. Self-restraint,
  however, is here practised within the secret society as something undertaken
  in company with others. But if self-restraint is only a private matter, and
  perhaps devoid of any religious aspect, then it may be as harmful as the
  personal secret. From this kind of self-restraint come our well-known ugly
  moods and the irritability of the over-virtuous. The emotion withheld is
  also something we conceal—something which we can hide even from ourselves—an
  art in which men particularly excel, while women, with very few exceptions,
  are by nature averse to doing such violence to their emotions. When emotion
  is withheld it tends to isolate and disturb us quite as much as an
  unconscious secret, and is equally guilt-laden. Just as nature bears us
  ill-will, as it were, if we possess a secret to which mankind has not
  attained, so also has she a grudge against us if we withhold our emotions
  from our fellow-men. Nature decidedly abhors a vacuum in this respect, in
  the long run nothing is more unbearable than a tepid harmony in personal
  relations brought about by withholding emotion. The repressed emotions are
  often of a kind we wish to keep secret. But more often there is no secret
  worthy of the name; there are merely quite avowable emotions which, from
  being withheld at some important juncture, have become unconscious. 

  It is probable that one form of neurosis is conditioned by the predominance
  of secrets, and another by the predominance of restrained emotions. At any
  rate the hysterical subject, who is very free with his emotions, is most
  often the possessor of a secret, while the hardened psychasthenic suffers
  from inability to digest his emotions. 

  To cherish secrets and to restrain emotions are psychic misdemeanours for
  which nature finally visits us with sickness—that is, when we do these things
  in private. But when they are done in communion with others they satisfy
  nature and may even count as useful virtues. It is only restraint practised
  in and for oneself that is unwholesome. It is as if man had an inalienable
  right to behold all that is dark, imperfect, stupid and guilty in his
  fellow-beings—for such of course are the things that we keep private to
  protect ourselves. It seems to be a sin in the eyes of nature to hide our
  insufficiency—just as much as to live entirely on our inferior side. There
  appears to be a conscience in mankind which severely punishes the man who
  does not somehow and at some time, at whatever cost to his pride, cease to
  defend and assert himself, and instead confess himself fallible and human.
  Until he can do this, an impenetrable wall shuts him out from the living
  experience of feeling himself a man among men. Here we find a key to the
  great significance of true, unstereotyped confession—a significance known in
  all the initiation and mystery cults of the ancient world, as is shown by a
  saying from the Greek mysteries: “Give up what thou hast, and then thou wilt
  receive”. 

  We may well take this saying as a motto for the first stage in
  psychotherapeutic treatment. It is a fact that the beginnings of
  psychoanalysis were fundamentally nothing else than the scientific
  rediscovery of an ancient truth; even the name catharsis (or cleansing),
  which was given to the earliest method of treatment, comes from the Greek
  initiation rites. The early method of catharsis consisted in putting the
  patient, with or without hypnotic aid, in touch with the hinterland of his
  mind—that is to say, into that state which the Eastern yoga systems describe
  as meditation or contemplation. In contrast to the meditation found in yoga
  practice, the psychoanalytic aim is to observe the shadowy presentations --
  whether in the form of images or of feelings—that are spontaneously evolved
  in the unconscious psyche and appear without his bidding to the man who looks
  within. In this way we find once more things that we have repressed or
  forgotten. Painful though it may be, this is in itself a gain -- for what is
  inferior or even worthless belongs to me as my shadow and gives me substance
  and mass. How can I be substantial if I fail to cast a shadow? I must have a
  dark side also if I am to be whole; and inasmuch as I become conscious of my
  shadow I also remember that I am a human being like any other. In any case,
  when I keep it to myself, this rediscovery of that which makes me whole
  restores the condition which preceded the neurosis or the splitting off of
  the complex. In keeping the matter private I have only attained a partial
  cure—for I still continue in my state of isolation. It is only with the help
  of confession that I am able to throw myself into the arms of humanity freed
  at last from the burden of moral exile. The goal of treatment by catharsis is
  full confession—no merely intellectual acknowledgement of the facts, but
  their confirmation by the heart and the actual release of the suppressed
  emotions. 

  As can easily be imagined, such confessions have a great effect with simple
  people, and their curative results are often astonishing. Yet I do not wish
  to point to the fact that some patients are cured as being the main
  achievement of psychotherapy at this level; what I wish to call attention to
  is the systematic emphasis given to the significance of confession. It is
  this which strikes home to all of us. For we are all in some way or other
  kept asunder by our secrets; and instead of seeking through confession to
  bridge the abysses that separate us from one another, we choose the easy
  by-way of deceptive opinions and illusions. In saying this, however, I am far
  from wishing to enunciate a general maxim. It would be hard to go too far in
  condemning the bad taste of a common, mutual confession of sins. The fact
  established by psychology is simply this: we are dealing here with a delicate
  matter. We cannot handle it directly or by itself, for it offers us a problem
  with unusually “pointed horns”. A consideration of the next stage—that of
  explanation—will make this clear. 

  It is evident enough that the new psychology would have remained at the stage
  of confession had catharsis proved itself a panacea. First and foremost, it
  is not always possible to bring certain patients close enough to the
  unconscious to enable them to perceive the shadows. Indeed, there are many
  patients, for the most part complicated, highly conscious persons, who are so
  firmly anchored in consciousness that nothing can pry them loose. They often
  develop the most violent resistances whenever an attempt is made to push
  consciousness aside; they wish to talk with the physician of things about
  which they are fully conscious—to make their difficulties intelligible and to
  discuss them. They already have quite enough to confess, they say; they do
  not have to turn to the unconscious for that. For such patients a complete
  technique for effecting the approach to the unconscious is needed. 

  This is one fact which at the outset seriously restricts us in applying the
  method of catharsis. The other limitation is revealed later on, and its
  discussion at once leads us to the problems of the second stage—the stage of
  explanation. Let us suppose that in a given case the confession demanded by
  the method of catharsis has taken place—that the neurosis has disappeared, or
  that the symptoms at least have vanished. The patient could now be dismissed
  as cured if it depended on the physician alone. But he—or especially
  she—cannot get away. The patient seems bound to the physician by the act of
  confession. If this apparently meaningless attachment is forcibly severed,
  there is a bad relapse. 

  It is both curious and significant that there are cases where no attachment
  develops. The patient goes away apparently cured—but he is now so fascinated
  by the hinterland of his own mind that he continues to practise catharsis by
  himself at the expense of his adaptation to life. He is bound to the
  unconscious—to himself—not to the physician. He has obviously shared the
  experience of Theseus and his comrade Pirithous in their descent to Hades to
  bring back the goddess of the underworld. Tiring on the way, they sat down to
  rest for a while, only to find that they had grown to the rocks and could not
  rise. These curious and unexpected occurrences must be explained to the
  patients, while the first-mentioned cases who were inaccessible to catharsis
  must also be handled by the method of explanation. In spite of the fact that
  the two classes of patients are apparently quite different, it is at the same
  point that explanation is called for—that is, where the problem of fixation
  arises, as was recognized by Freud. This fixation is evident enough in
  patients who have undergone catharsis, and it is especially clear in those
  who remain attached to the physician. Something similar has already been
  observed as an unpleasant result of hypnotic treatment, but the inner
  mechanism of such a tie was not understood. It now appears that the
  questionable bond essentially corresponds to the relation between father and
  child. The patient falls into a sort of childish dependence from which he
  cannot protect himself even by reason and insight. The fixation is at times
  astonishingly strong—so much so that one suspects it of being fed by forces
  quite out of the common. But since the process of transference is an
  unconscious one, the patient is unable to give any information about it. We
  are obviously dealing with a new symptom—a neurotic formation directly
  induced by the treatment. The question therefore arises: How is this new
  difficulty to be met? The unmistakable outward sign of the situation is that
  the memory-image of the father with its accent of feeling is transferred to
  the physician. Inasmuch as the latter willy-nilly appears in the rôle of
  father, the patient slips into a childish relation. He has not, of course,
  been made childish by this relation; there was always something childish
  about him, but it was suppressed. Now it comes to the surface, and—the
  long-lost father being found again—it tries to reproduce the family situation
  of childhood. Freud gave to this symptom the appropriate name of
  “transference”. A certain dependence upon the physician who has helped you is
  of course normal and understandable enough. What is abnormal and unexpected
  is the unusual obstinacy of the transference and its inaccessibility to
  conscious correction. It is one of Freud’s outstanding achievements to have
  explained the nature of this tie—at least in the light of man’s personal
  history—and so to have cleared the way for an important advance in
  psychological knowledge. It has today been put beyond a doubt that it is
  caused by unconscious fantasies. These fantasies have in the main what we may
  call an “incestuous” character; and this seems adequately to explain the fact
  that they remain unconscious and cannot be expected to turn up in the most
  thorough confession. Although Freud always speaks of incest-fantasies as if
  they were repressed, further experience shows us that in many cases they have
  never been conscious or have been sensed only in the vaguest way—for which
  reason they could not be intentionally repressed. More recent research seems
  to show that the incest-fantasies are usually unconscious and so remain till
  they are dragged to light in analytical treatment. By this I do not mean that
  pulling them up from the unconscious is an interference with nature which we
  should avoid; I merely wish to suggest that the procedure is almost as
  drastic as a surgical operation. But it is wholly unavoidable in that the
  analytical procedure induces a transference which is abnormal, and can only
  be dealt with by reaching the incest-fantasies. 

  While the method of catharsis restores to the ego such contents as are
  accessible to consciousness and are normally included in it, the process of
  clearing up the transference brings to light contents which, because of their
  nature, were almost inaccessible to consciousness. This is the main
  difference between the stage of confession and the stage of explanation. 

  We have discussed above two sets of cases: those of such patients as do not
  lend themselves to the method of catharsis, and those for whom it gives
  results. We have moreover just treated of those whose fixation takes the form
  of a transference. Besides these there are those people we have also
  mentioned who develop no attachment to the physician, but rather one to their
  own unconscious, in which they become entangled as in a web. In these cases
  the parental image is not transferred to a human object. It is seen as a
  fantasy, and yet it exerts the same power of attraction and produces the same
  attachment as does the transference. 

  The patients who cannot give themselves without reserve to treatment by
  catharsis can be understood in the light of Freudian research. We can see
  that, even before coming to the doctor, they had identified themselves with
  their parents, and derive from this identification that force of authority,
  that independence and critical power which enables them to offer a successful
  resistance to the treatment. These are chiefly cultivated and differentiated
  persons. While others become the helpless victims of the unconscious parental
  image, these draw strength from it by unconsciously identifying themselves
  with their parents. 

  In the matter of the transference, we can get nowhere with the help of
  confession. It was this which drove Freud to a fundamental renovation of
  Breuer’s original technique of catharsis, and to what he himself called the
  “interpretative method”. This further step necessarily follows, for the
  relationship produced by the transference especially requires explanation.
  The layman can hardly appreciate the importance of this; but the doctor who
  finds himself suddenly entangled in a web of incomprehensible and fantastic
  notions sees it all too clearly. He must interpret the transference to the
  patient—that is, explain to him what it is that he projects upon his doctor.
  Since the patient himself does not know what it is, the physician is forced
  to subject what scraps of fantasy he can obtain from the patient to
  analytical interpretation. It is first and foremost our dreams which furnish
  this important material. While investigating the suppression of wishes which
  are incompatible with our conscious standpoint, Freud studied dreams in
  search of these wishes, and in the process discovered the incestuous contents
  of which I have spoken. These were of course not the only materials revealed
  by the investigation; he discovered all the filth of which human nature is
  capable—and it is notorious that it would require a lifetime to make even a
  rough inventory of it. The end-product of the Freudian method of explanation
  is a detailed elaboration of man’s shadow-side such as had never been carried
  out before. It is the most effective antidote imaginable to all idealistic
  illusions about the nature of man; and it is therefore no wonder that there
  arose on all sides the most violent opposition to Freud and his school. We
  could expect nothing else of those who believe in illusions on principle; but
  I maintain that there are not a few among the opponents of the method of
  explanation who have no illusions as to man’s shadow-side, and who yet object
  to a biassed portrayal of man from the shadowside alone. After all, the
  essential thing is not the shadow, but the body which casts it. 

  Freud’s method of interpretation rests upon “reductive” explanations which
  unfailingly lead backward and downward, and it has a destructive effect if it
  is used in an exaggerated and one-sided way. Nevertheless psychology has
  profited greatly from Freud’s pioneer work; it has learned that human nature
  has also a black side, and that not man alone possesses this side, but his
  works, his institutions, and his convictions as well. Even our purest and
  holiest beliefs can be traced to the crudest origins. This way of looking at
  things even has its justification, for the beginning of all living organisms
  is simple and lowly; we build our houses from the foundation up. No
  thoughtful person will deny that Salomon Reinach’s explanation of the Last
  Supper in terms of primitive totemism is fraught with meaning; nor will he
  object to the incest-theme being pointed out in the myths of the Greek
  divinities. It is painful—there is no denying it—to interpret radiant things
  from the shadow-side, and thus in a measure reduce them to their origins in
  dreary filth. But it seems to me to be an imperfection in things of beauty,
  and a weakness in man, if an explanation from the shadow-side has a
  destructive effect. The horror which we feel for Freudian interpretations is
  entirely due to our own barbaric or childish naïveté, which believes that
  there can be heights without corresponding depths, and which blinds us to the
  really “final” truth that, when carried to extremes, opposites meet. Our
  mistake would lie in supposing that what is radiant no longer exists because
  it has been explained from the shadow-side. This is a regrettable error into
  which Freud himself has fallen. Yet the shadow belongs to the light as the
  evil belongs to the good, and vice versa. Therefore I cannot regret the shock
  that was felt at the exposure of our occidental illusions and pettiness; on
  the contrary, I welcome this exposure and attach to it an almost incalculable
  significance. It is one of those swings of the pendulum which, as history has
  so often shown, set matters right again. It forces us to accept a present-day
  philosophical relativism such as has been formulated by Einstein for
  mathematical physics, and which is fundamentally a truth of the far East
  whose ultimate effects upon us we cannot foresee. 

  Nothing influences our conduct less than do intellectual ideas. But when an
  idea is the expression of psychic experience which bears fruit in regions as
  far separated and as free from historical relation as East and West, then we
  must look into the matter closely. For such ideas represent forces that are
  beyond logical justification and moral sanction; they are always stronger
  than man and his brain. Man believes indeed that he moulds these ideas, but
  in reality they mould him and make him their unwitting mouthpiece. 

  To return again to the problem of fixation, I should like now to deal with
  the effects of the process of explanation. The patient becomes aware of the
  unsoundness of his position with respect to the doctor when his transference
  has been traced back to its dark origins; he cannot avoid seeing how
  inappropriate and childish his claims are. If he has been inflated by a sense
  of authority, he will exchange his elevated position for one that is more
  modest, and will accept an insecurity which may prove very wholesome. If he
  has not yet renounced his infantile claims upon the doctor, he will now
  recognize the inescapable truth that to make claims on others is a childish
  self-indulgence which must be replaced by a greater sense of his own
  responsibility. The man of insight will draw his own moral conclusions.
  Convinced of his own deficiencies, he will use this knowledge as a means of
  protection; he will plunge into the struggle for existence and consume in
  progressive work and experience that force of longing which has caused him to
  cling obstinately to a child’s paradise or at least to look back at it over
  his shoulder. A normal adaptation and patience with his own shortcomings will
  become his guiding moral principles, and he will try to free himself from
  sentimentality and illusion. The inevitable result will be that he turns away
  from the unconscious as from a source of weakness and temptation -- the field
  of moral and social defeat. 

  The problem which now faces the patient is that of being educated as a social
  being, and with this we come to the third stage. Mere insight into themselves
  is sufficient for morally sensitive persons who have enough driving force to
  carry them forward; for those with little imagination for moral values,
  however, it does not suffice. Without the spur of external necessity,
  self-knowledge is ineffective for them even when they are deeply convinced—to
  say nothing of those who have been struck by the analyst’s interpretation and
  yet doubt it after all. These last are mentally disciplined people who grasp
  the truth of a “reductive” explanation, but cannot accept it when it merely
  invalidates their hopes and ideals. In these cases also mere insight is
  insufficient. It is a weakness of the method of explanation that it succeeds
  only with sensitive persons who can draw independent moral conclusions from
  their understanding of themselves. It is true that we can get further with
  explanation than with uninterpreted confession alone, for it at least trains
  the mind, and therefore may awaken sleeping powers which can intervene in a
  helpful way. But the fact remains leaves the patient in many cases an
  intelligent but still incapable child. The trouble is that Freudian
  explanations in terms of pleasure and its satisfaction are one-sided and
  therefore insufficient, especially when applied to the later stages of
  development. This viewpoint will not account for everybody; for even if
  everyone possesses this side, it is not always the most important. A hungry
  artist prefers bread to a beautiful painting, and a man in love prefers a
  woman to his public career; yet the painting may be of the greatest
  importance to the one and public office to the other. On the average, those
  who easily achieve social adaptation and social position are better accounted
  for by the pleasure principle than are the unadapted whose social
  shortcomings leave them with a craving for power and importance. The older
  brother who follows in the footsteps of his father and attains a commanding
  position, may be tortured by his desires; but the younger brother who feels
  repressed and overshadowed by the other two, may be goaded by ambition or the
  craving for respect. He may even yield so completely to this passion that
  nothing else is vital to him. 

  At this point we become aware that Freud’s explanation of things falls short,
  and it is precisely here that his former pupil, Adler, comes forward to fill
  the gap. Adler has shown convincingly that many cases of neurosis can be more
  satisfactorily explained on the ground of an urge to power than by the
  pleasure principle. His interpretation therefore is designed to show the
  patient that he “arranges” his symptoms and exploits his neurosis to attain a
  fictitious importance; that even his transference and his other fixations
  serve his will to power, and thus represent a “masculine protest” against a
  fancied subjection. Adler obviously has his eye on repressed and socially
  unsuccessful people whose one passion is for self-assertion. These people are
  neurotic because they always imagine themselves oppressed and tilt at the
  windmills of their own fancies, thus putting the goal they most desire quite
  out of reach. In essentials, Adler’s method begins at the second stage; he
  explains the symptoms in the sense just indicated, and to this extent appeals
  to the patient’s understanding. Yet it is characteristic of Adler that he
  does not expect too much of understanding, but, taking a further step, has
  clearly recognized the need for social education. While Freud is an
  investigator and interpreter, Adler is chiefly an educator. In refusing to
  leave the patient in a childish condition, helpless for all his valuable
  understanding, and in trying by every device of education to make him a
  normally adapted person, Adler modifies Freud’s procedure. He does all this
  apparently in the conviction that social adaptation and normalization are
  indispensable—that they are even the most desirable goals and the most
  suitable fulfilment for a human being. The widespread social influence of
  Adler’s school is a consequence of this outlook—as also its neglect of the
  unconscious, which on occasions, it seems, amounts to complete denial. This
  is probably a swing of the pendulum—an inevitable reaction to Freud’s
  emphasis on the unconscious, which corresponds to the natural aversion for it
  which we have noted in patients who are struggling for adaptation and health.
  For if the unconscious is held to be a mere receptacle for all the evil
  shadow-things in human nature, including even primeval slime-deposits, we
  really do not see why we should still linger on the edge of this swamp into
  which we once fell. The investigator may see in the mud-puddle a world full
  of wonders, but to the ordinary man it is something upon which he prefers to
  turn his back. Just as early Buddhism recognized no gods because it had to
  free itself from an inheritance of nearly two million gods, so must
  psychology, if it is to develop further, renounce so essentially negative an
  approach to the unconscious as Freud’s. 

  The Adlerian school, with its educational intent, begins at the very point
  where Freud leaves off, and thus helps the patient who has learned to see
  into himself to find the way to normal life. It is obviously not enough for
  him to know how and why he fell ill, for to understand the causes of an evil
  does very little towards curing it. We must never forget that the crooked
  paths of a neurosis lead to as many obstinate habits, and that, despite any
  amount of understanding, these do not disappear until they are replaced by
  other habits. But habits are only won by exercise, and appropriate education
  is the sole means to this end. The patient must be, as it were, prodded into
  other paths, and this always requires an educating will. We can therefore see
  why it is that Adler’s approach has found favour chiefly with clergymen and
  teachers, while Freud’s school has its advocates among physicians and
  intellectuals, who one and all are bad nurses and educators. 

  Every stage in our psychic development has something peculiarly final about
  it. When we have experienced catharsis with its wholesale confession we feel
  that we have reached our goal at last; all has come out, all is known, every
  anxiety has been lived through and every tear shed; now things will go as
  they ought. After the work of explanation we are equally persuaded that we
  now know how the neurosis arose. The earliest memories have been unearthed,
  the deepest roots dug up; the transference was nothing but the
  wish-fulfilling fantasy of a child’s paradise or a regression to the old
  family situation; the way to a normally disillusioned life is now open. But
  then comes the period of education, which makes us realize that no confession
  and no amount of explaining will make the ill-formed tree grow straight, but
  that it must be trained with the gardener’s art upon the trellis before
  normal adaptation can be attained. The curious sense of finality which
  attends every stage of development accounts for the fact that there are
  people using catharsis today who have apparently never heard of dream
  interpretation; Freudians who do not understand a word of Adler, and
  Adlerians who do not wish to hear any mention of the unconscious. Each is
  deceived by the sense of finality peculiar to the stage of development at
  which he stands, and this gives rise to that confusion of opinions and views
  which makes it so hard for us to find our bearings. But what causes this
  sense of finality which evokes such bigoted obstinacy in all directions? I
  can only explain it to myself on the ground that each stage of development is
  summed up in a basic truth, and that therefore cases frequently recur which
  demonstrate this truth in a striking way. Our world is so exceedingly rich in
  delusions that a truth is priceless, and no one will let it slip because of a
  few exceptions with which it cannot be brought into accord. Whoever doubts
  this truth is of course looked upon as a faithless reprobate, while a note of
  fanaticism and intolerance creeps into the discussion on all sides. 

  And yet each of us can carry the torch of knowledge but a part of the way,
  until another takes it from him. Could we but accept this in an impersonal
  way—could we but grasp the fact that we are not the personal creators of our
  truths, but only their exponents who thus make articulate the psychic needs
  of our day—then much of the poison and bitterness might be spared and we
  should be able to perceive the profound and superpersonal continuity of the
  human mind. 

  We generally take too little account of the fact that the doctor who uses
  catharsis as a mode of treatment is something more than the embodiment of an
  abstract idea which automatically produces nothing but catharsis. He is also
  a man. His thinking, to be sure, may be limited to his special field, but in
  his behaviour he exerts the influence of a complete human being. Without
  being clearly conscious of it or giving it a name, he unwittingly does a
  great deal in the way of explanation and education; and other analysts do as
  much in the way of catharsis without raising it to the level of a principle. 

  The three stages of analytical psychology so far dealt with are by no means
  of such a nature that the last can replace the first or the second. All three
  quite properly co-exist and are salient aspects of one and the same problem;
  they no more invalidate each other than do confession and absolution. And the
  same is true of the fourth—the stage of transformation: it must not claim to
  be the finally-achieved and only valid truth. Its part is to make up a
  deficit left by the previous stages; it comes to meet an additional and still
  unsatisfied need. 

  In order to make clear what this fourth stage has in view, and to throw some
  light on the curious term “transformation”, we must first take account of
  those psychic needs of man which were not given a place in the other stages.
  In other words, we must ascertain what could seem more desirable or lead
  further than the claim to be a normally adapted, social being. Nothing is
  more useful or fitting than to be a normal human being; but the very notion
  of a “normal human being” suggests a restriction to the average—as does also
  the concept of adaptation. It is only a man who, as things stand, already
  finds it difficult to come to terms with the everyday world who can see in
  this restriction a desirable improvement: a man, let us say, whose neurosis
  unfits him for normal life. To be “normal” is a splendid ideal for the
  unsuccessful, for all those who have not yet found an adaptation. But for
  people who have far more ability than the average, for whom it was never hard
  to gain successes and to accomplish their share of the world’s work—for them
  restriction to the normal signifies the bed of Procrustes, unbearable
  boredom, infernal sterility and hopelessness. As a consequence there are many
  people who become neurotic because they are only normal, as there are people
  who are neurotic because they cannot become normal. For the former the very
  thought that you want to educate them to normality is a nightmare; their
  deepest need is really to be able to lead “abnormal” lives. A man can hope
  for satisfaction and fulfilment only in what he does not yet possess; he
  cannot find pleasure in something of which he has already had too much. To be
  a socially adapted being has no charms for one to whom to be so is mere
  child's play, Always to do what is right becomes a bore for the man knows
  how, whereas the eternal bungler cherishes the secret longing to be right for
  once in some distant future. The needs and necessities of individuals vary.
  What sets one free is for another a prison—as for instance normality and
  adaptation. Although it is a biological dictum that man is a herd animal and
  is only healthy when he lives as a social being, yet the first case we
  observe may seem to upset this statement, and to prove that man is only
  healthy when leading an abnormal and unsocial life. It is a terrible
  misfortune that practical psychology can offer no generally valid recipes and
  norms. There are only individual cases whose needs and demands are totally
  different—so different that we really cannot foresee what course a given case
  will follow. It is therefore wise of the physician to renounce all premature
  assumptions. This does not mean that he should throw all his assumptions
  overboard, but that he should regard them in any given case as hypothetical. 

  Yet it is not the doctor’s whole task to instruct or convince his patient; he
  must rather show him how the doctor reacts to his particular case. For twist
  and turn the matter as we may, the relation between physician and patient
  remains personal within the frame of the impersonal, professional treatment.
  We cannot by any device bring it about that the treatment is not the outcome
  of a mutual influence in which the whole being of the patient as well as that
  of the doctor plays its part. Two primary factors come together in the
  treatment—that is, two persons, neither of whom is a fixed and determinable
  magnitude. Their fields of consciousness may be quite clearly defined, but
  they bring with them besides an indefinitely extended sphere of
  unconsciousness. For this reason the personalities of the doctor and patient
  have often more to do with the outcome of the treatment than what the doctor
  says or thinks—although we must not undervalue this latter factor as a
  disturbing or healing one. The meeting of two personalities is like the
  contact of two chemical substances: if there is any reaction, both are
  transformed. We should expect the doctor to have an influence on the patient
  in every effective psychic treatment; but this influence can only take place
  when he too is affected by the patient. You can exert no influence if you are
  not susceptible to influence. It is futile for the doctor to shield himself
  from the influence of the patient and to surround himself with a smoke-screen
  of fatherly and professional authority. If he does so he merely forbids
  himself the use of a highly important organ of information, and the patient
  influences him unconsciously none the less. The unconscious changes in the
  doctor which the patient thus brings about are well known to many
  psychotherapists; they are disturbances, or even injuries, peculiar to the
  profession, which illustrate in a striking way the patient’s almost
  “chemical” influence. One of the best known of them is the
  counter-transference which the transference evokes. But the effects are often
  more subtle, and their nature is best conveyed by the old idea of the demon
  of sickness. According to this a sufferer transmits his disease to a healthy
  person whose powers subdue the demon—but not without a negative influence
  upon the well-being of the healer. 

  In the relation between doctor and patient we meet with imponderable factors
  which bring about a mutual transformation. In this exchange, the more stable
  and the stronger personality will decide the final issue. But I have seen
  many cases in which the patient has proved stronger than the doctor in
  defiance of all theory and the doctor’s intention; and where this has
  happened it has most often, though not always, been to the disadvantage of
  the doctor. The fact of mutual influence and all that goes with it underlies
  the stage of transformation. More than a quarter of a century of wide
  practical experience was needed for the clear recognition of these
  manifestations. Freud himself has admitted their importance and has therefore
  seconded my demand that the analyst himself be analysed. But what is the
  wider meaning of this demand? It means nothing less than that the doctor “is
  just as much in analysis” as the patient. He is as much a part of the psychic
  process of the treatment as is the patient, and is equally exposed to the
  transforming influences. Indeed, if the doctor is more or less inaccessible
  to this influence, he is correspondingly robbed of his influence over the
  patient; if he is influenced only unconsciously, he shows a defect of
  consciousness which prevents him from seeing the patient correctly. In both
  cases the result of the treatment is compromised. 

  The physician, then, is called upon himself to face that task which he wishes
  the patient to face. If it is a question of becoming socially adapted, he
  himself must become so—or, in the reverse case, appropriately non-adapted.
  There are of course a thousand different aspects of this requirement in
  therapy, according to the situation in a given case. One doctor believes in
  overcoming infantilism—and therefore he must have overcome his own
  infantilism. Another believes in the abreaction of all emotion—and so he must
  have abreacted all his own emotions. A third believes in complete
  consciousness—so that he must have reached an advanced state of consciousness
  himself. At all events the doctor must consistently try to meet his own
  therapeutic demands if he wishes to assure himself of a proper influence on
  his patient. All these guiding principles in therapy confront the doctor with
  important ethical duties which can be summed up in the single rule: be the
  man through whom you wish to influence others. Mere talk has always been
  considered hollow, and there is no trick, however cunning, by which one can
  evade this simple rule for long. The fact of being convinced, and not the
  subject-matter of conviction—it is this which has always carried weight. 

  The fourth stage of analytical psychology, then, demands not only the
  transformation of the patient, but also the counterapplication to himself by
  the doctor of the system which he prescribes in any given case. And in
  dealing with himself the doctor must display as much relentlessness,
  consistency and perseverance as in dealing with his patients. To work upon
  himself with an equal concentration is truly no small achievement; for he
  brings to bear all the attentiveness and critical judgement he can summon in
  showing his patients their mistaken paths, their false conclusions and
  infantile subterfuges. No one pays the doctor for his introspective efforts;
  and moreover, we are generally not interested enough in ourselves. Again, we
  so commonly undervalue the deeper aspects of the human psyche that we hold
  self- examination or preoccupation with ourselves to be almost morbid. We
  evidently suspect ourselves of harbouring rather unwholesome things all too
  reminiscent of a sick-room. The physician must overcome these resistances in
  himself, for who can educate others while himself uneducated? Who can
  enlighten his fellows while still in the dark about himself, and who can
  purify if he is himself unclean? 

  The step from educating others to self-education is demanded of the doctor in
  the stage of transformation. It is the corollary of the demand that the
  patient transform himself and thus complete the earlier stages of the
  treatment. This challenge to the doctor to transform himself in order to
  effect a change in the patient meets with scant popular approval, for three
  reasons. First of all it seems unpractical; secondly, there is a prejudice
  against being occupied with ourselves; and thirdly, it is sometimes very
  painful to make ourselves live up to everything that we expect of the
  patient. This last is the strongest reason for the unpopularity of the demand
  that the doctor examine himself; for if he conscientiously “doctors” himself
  he will soon discover things in his nature which are completely opposed to
  normalization, or which continue to haunt him in the most disturbing way in
  spite of exhaustive explanations and thorough abreaction. What will he do
  about these things? He always knows what the patient should do about them—it
  is his professional duty to do so. But what will he in all sincerity do about
  them when they involve himself or perhaps those who stand nearest to him? If
  he examines himself he will discover some inferior side which brings him
  dangerously near to his patient and perhaps even blights his authority. How
  will he handle this tormenting discovery? This somewhat “neurotic” question
  will touch him on the quick, no matter how normal he deems himself to be. He
  will also discover that the ultimate questions which oppress him as well as
  his patients cannot be solved by any amount of “treatment”. He will let them
  see that to expect solutions from others is a way of remaining childish; and
  he will see for himself that, if no solutions can be found, these questions
  must only be repressed again. 

  I will not discuss further the matter of self-examination and the many
  problems it raises, because the great obscurity which still surrounds our
  study of the psyche allows of little interest in them. I would rather
  emphasize what has already been said: that the newest developments of
  analytical psychology confront us with the imponderable elements of human
  personality; that we have learned to place in the foreground the personality
  of the doctor himself as a curative or harmful factor; and that we have begun
  to demand his own transformation—the self-education of the educator.
  Everything that happened to the patient must now happen to the doctor, and he
  must pass through the stages of confession, explanation and education so that
  his personality will not react unfavourably on the patient. The physician may
  no longer slip out of his own difficulties by treating the difficulties of
  others. He will remember that a man who suffers from a running abscess is not
  fit to perform a surgical operation. 

  Just as the discovery of the unconscious shadow-side once forced the school
  of Freud to deal even with questions of religion, so the latest advance of
  analytical psychology makes an unavoidable problem of the doctor’s ethical
  attitude. The selfcriticism and self-examination demanded of him radically
  alter our view of the human psyche. This cannot be grasped from the
  standpoint of natural science it is not only the sufferer but the physician
  as well; not only the object but also the subject; not only a function of the
  brain, but the sine qua non of consciousness itself. 

  What was formerly a method of medical treatment now becomes a method of
  self-education, and therewith the horizon of our modern psychology is
  immeasurably widened. The medical diploma is no longer the crucial thing, but
  human quality instead. This is a significant step. All the implements of
  psychotherapy developed in clinical practice, refined and systematized, are
  now put at our service and can be used for our self-education and
  self-perfectioning. Analytical psychology is no longer bound to the
  consulting-room of the doctor; its chains have been severed. We might say
  that it transcends itself, and now advances to fill that void which hitherto
  has marked the psychic insufficiency of Western culture as compared with that
  of the East. We Occidentals had learned to tame and subject the psyche, but
  we knew nothing about its methodical development and its functions. Our
  civilization is still young, and we therefore required all the devices of the
  animal-tamer to make the defiant barbarian and the savage in us in some
  measure tractable. But when we reach a higher cultural level, we must forgo
  compulsion and turn to self- development. For this we must have knowledge of
  a way or a method—and so far we have known of none. It seems to me that the
  findings and experiences of analytical psychology can at least provide a
  foundation; for as soon as psychotherapy requires the self-perfecting of the
  doctor, it is freed from its clinical origins and ceases to be a mere method
  for treating the sick. It is now of service to the healthy as well, or at
  least to those who have a right to psychic health and whose illness is at
  most the suffering that tortures us all. For this reason we may hope to see
  analytical psychology become of general use—more so even than the methods
  which constitute its preliminary stages and which severally carry a general truth. 
  But between the realization of this hope and the actual present there lies an
  abyss over wich no bridge is to be found. Wh have yet to build it stone by
  stone.

* The aims of Psychotherapy

